Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 1042, 2021, pp. 449–452 doi:10.4269/ajtmh.20-1485 Copyright © 2021 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene Perspective Piece COVID-19 Highlights the Need for Inclusive Responses to Public Health Emergencies in Africa Yusuff Adebayo Adebisi,1 Aniekan Ekpenyong,2 Blaise Ntacyabukura,3 Mat Lowe,4 Naﬁsat Dasola Jimoh,5 Toyyib Oladimeji Abdulkareem,6 and Don Eliseo Lucero-Prisno III7 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria; 2Global Health Policy Unit, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom; 3Global Public Health Department, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Society for the Study of Women’s Health SSWH, Old Yundum, Gambia; 5Federal University of Technology Minna, Minna, Nigeria; 6Institute of Health, Faculty of Education, Health and Wellbeing, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, United Kingdom; 7Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom Abstract. COVID-19 is a global public health emergency affecting many countries around the world. Although African governments and other stakeholders are making efforts to contain the pandemic, the outbreak continues to impact human rights and exacerbates inequalities and disparities that are already in existence. The concept of inclusive health focuses on good health and well-being for everyone, and this entails health services that are equitable, affordable, and efﬁcacious. Creating equitable access to mainstream health and healthcare services and ensuring inclusive health responses remain a means of addressing health inequities and disparities. In this article, we argue on the need for inclusive responses to public health emergencies in Africa using COVID-19 as a case example. Africa’s response to public health emergencies needs to recognize that for every marginalized/vulnerable group, it is important to strategize to address their particular needs in such a way to surmount any barrier to the right to health. For Africa’s public health response to be more inclusive, we therefore need to be more strategic and proactive in reaching out to speciﬁc groups and to identify and address their needs. Strengthening the healthcare systems of African countries through increased political will, increased funding to health care, collaboration and cooperation among stakeholders, and effective leadership remains essential in ensuring inclusive responses to health emergencies. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to threaten public health systems around the world, and the African continent is not spared.1–3 The pandemic presents an unprecedented humanitarian crisis that has impacted health systems and disrupted the livelihood and overall well-being of people globally.4,5 Although the number of COVID-19 cases in Africa is currently lower than that of other regions of the world, these numbers are increasing gradually.1 As of November 14, 2020, 1,965,485 cases and 47,134 deaths have been reported in the African region.6 The pandemic has made evident weaknesses in responding to public health emergencies such as COVID- 19, on the continent.1 Although African governments and other stakeholders continue to make efforts to contain the pandemic, there is more to be done to put the pandemic to an end. Nonetheless, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to im- pact human rights and exacerbates inequalities and dispar- ities that are already in existence. Despite the efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic on the continent, the mar- ginalized and underrepresented groups have been reported to be left behind and discriminated against in the course of the COVID-19 responses.7,8 Creating equitable access to main- stream healthcare services and ensuring inclusive health re- sponses serve as a means of addressing health inequities and disparities. In this article, we argue on the need for inclusive health response to public health emergencies in Africa using COVID-19 as a case example. The concept of inclusive health focuses on good health and well-being for everyone; and this entails health services that are equitable, affordable, and efﬁcacious.9 This concept also Address correspondence to Yusuff Adebayo Adebisi, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria. E-mail: adebisiyusuff23@ yahoo.com resonates with a rights-based approach to health including political, social, economic, scientiﬁc, and cultural actions that are geared toward advancing the cause of good health and well-being for all.9 With the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is increasingly important to ensure an inclusive health approach to health emergencies on the continent. It is now evident that it is not all about achieving “health for all” but an “inclusive approach” in meeting the health needs and responding to public health emergencies.9 In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and other public health emergencies, health responses need to be genuinely empowering so that vulnerable, underrepresented, and marginalized “voices” are included in social discourse, policy, and the health response. Although most health policy documents may refer to “all people,” “for all,” “all citizens,” or “everybody,” they often end up privileging “some” over “all.”9 Vulnerable and marginalized populations usually have greater healthcare needs than others and are therefore more vulnerable to the impact of low-quality, inaccessible healthcare services as well as noninclusive uni- form public health responses than others.8 In addressing public health issues, it is important to make it clear that no one is more important than the other, and the response efforts must not leave behind the most disad- vantaged groups. The impact of public health response needs to be viewed from the lens of how it will affect the marginalized group and what can be done to prevent any form of inequity. Right to health is a human right, so the approach to responding to health emergencies needs to be able to ensure that right to equitable health is not infringed on and the outcome of the response should not weigh negatively on the vulnerable groups. It is also worthy to note that if public health responses exclude the marginalized “voices,” there is a potential threat of reversal in any hard- won progress and efforts in addressing such public health crisis.7,8 This highlights the need for African governments, TABLE 1 Speciﬁc health needs of some vulnerable groups amid the COVID-19 pandemic and recommendations Vulnerable group Speciﬁc health needs in the context of COVID-19 Recommendations Older adults Access to personal protective equipment PPE Use telemedicine and other remote consultation Social and mental health support strategies Integrate older adults’ care into primary healthcare systems Clear risk communication language Undisrupted access to medicines and healthcare services, including COVID-19 testing Use geriatrics differentiated healthcare services Leverage community health workers for nonspecialized healthcare support Pregnant women Antenatal care services including medications and Devise locally compatible strategies to ensure specialist consultation uninterrupted antenatal care services Women and girls Access to PPE Social and mental health support Access to sexual and reproductive care services including family planning Access to menstrual hygiene care and products Mental health and social care support to those facing violence and abuse People living with disabilities Health needs associated with the impairment must be prioritized Information on COVID-19 in accessible formats Access to PPE Social and mental health support Access to antipsychotic medications and psychosocial support should be prioritized Ensure access to sexual and reproductive health services, keeping clinics open and/or telehealth Ensure access to contraceptives and other essential medicines Leverage community health workers for nonspecialized healthcare support Inclusive engagement for people living with disabilities Use telemedicine and other remote consultation strategies People living with mental health disorders People who use drugs People living with HIV People living with chronic diseases, for example, diabetes Sex workers, men who have sex with men, and transgender people People in prisons and other closed settings Access to harm reduction services including needle Work with drug use advocacy groups and civil exchange and opioid substitution therapy Access to care and prevention services for HIV, hepatitis, COVID-19, and sexually transmitted diseases Social and mental health support Rehabilitation and drug treatment centers must be prioritized Sustained access to HIV drugs and care services Social and mental health support COVID-19 testing Treatment and care services for tuberculosis and other opportunistic infections must be prioritized Access to condoms and PPE Access to medicines and PPE Clear risk communication language Social and mental health support Access to HIV care and prevention services Access to hepatitis, COVID-19, and sexually transmitted diseases testing Access to condoms and PPE Social and mental health support Prison-based harm reduction services society organizations to ensure access to health services Decriminalization of drug use and avoidance of discrimination and stigmatization of people who use drugs Strengthening of HIV differentiated care services Decentralization of HIV care and use of telemedicine Work with HIV advocacy groups to ensure access to health services Use telemedicine and other remote consultation strategies Work with the relevant advocacy groups and civil society organizations to ensure access to health services Decriminalization and avoidance of discrimination and stigmatization of vulnerable groups should be prioritized to ensure access to health services Ensure that the right to health among inmates is not infringed on Access to condoms and PPE Structures that allow for physical distancing and Direct investment to enable African prisons to cope with public health emergencies proper ventilation Access to clean water and soap COVID-19 testing national health authorities, and other stakeholders to lead the path in ensuring inclusive responses to public health emergencies. Sex workers in some African countries e.g., Nigeria, Uganda, and Botswana are excluded from the government’s safety nets in response to COVID-19.7 This forced some sex workers back to work amid the lockdown imposed by the national health authorities in the early days of the pandemic. Lockdown pol- icies in many African countries and globally have signiﬁcantly affected access to antiretroviral drugs and care services among people living with HIV. People living with disabilities have also been signiﬁcantly affected by uniform response activities in many African countries.10 According to a rapid virtual audit of pandemic-related press brieﬁngs and press conferences issued by governments and international orga- nizations, only 54% of sub-Saharan African countries have a sign language interpreter present in COVID-19 press brieﬁngs and conferences.11 COVID-19 has already caused interrup- tions in vaccination schedules in many African countries, further putting many children at risk of vaccine-preventable COVID-19 AND INCLUSIVE HEALTH RESPONSE IN AFRICA diseases. It has also weakened public health responses to ailments such as malaria and meningitis outbreaks and re- duced access to maternal and reproductive health services, further discriminately affecting at-risk groups. COVID-19 also highlights the vulnerability of healthcare professionals to the impact of public health emergencies and how they can be discriminately affected. This vulnerability is compounded by limited access to protective equipment and stigmatization, which impacts on their mental health, as reported in some African countries.5 Some researchers have also reported how people who use drugs are left out of the COVID-19 responses in some African countries, for example, Kenya and Nigeria, with the potential threat of affecting HIV response and access to healthcare services among this group.8,12 COVID-19 has also been re- ported to exacerbate long-standing problems in Africa’s prisons and how precautionary measures, such as hand- washing and physical distancing to reduce disease trans- mission among the inmates, are challenging to observe because of poor infrastructure.13 A report from Kenya, Tanza- nia, and Uganda, the regions with consistently high maternal and neonatal mortality rates, also revealed that the COVID- vices.14 The disruption of these services, if not addressed, may affect the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births by 2030. The noted disruption in healthcare services in Africa is also affecting older adults with chronic diseases in the region.15 Access to healthcare services among people living with chronic dis- eases,16 people with lower socioeconomic status, homeless people, migrants, minorities, and other vulnerable groups is discriminately affected before the pandemic, and the urgent need to address the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated this challenge. Although some efforts have been made in Africa toward ensuring an inclusive response, more efforts still need to be carried out. For instance, Ethiopia is translating COVID- languages17 and the country plans to make communication materials acces- sible to those with seeing, learning, and hearing difﬁcul- ties, as well as people living with mental illness.10 It has also been reported that South Africa has granted $10.6 mil- lion aid to assist small, medium, and microenterprises, with people living with disabilities and women prioritized.10 In Nigeria, a faith-based organization is helping with sign lan- guage interpretation of COVID-19 health information.10 Afri- ca’s response to public health emergencies needs to recognize that for every marginalized/vulnerable group, it is important that any health intervention designed to meet their needs must be carried out in a way that surmounts any barriers to accessing health care. For Africa’s public health response to be more inclusive, there is a need to be more strategic and proactive in reaching out to speciﬁc groups to identify and address their peculiar needs Table 1. An inclusive health approach needs action and not just mere inclusion in policy documents. The ap- proach will not only foster solidarity, health equity, and ef- fective community response to public health interventions and emergencies, it is also in line with the sixth element of the Universal Health Coverage movement—“Move Together”— which involves setting up diverse multi-stakeholder strategies response remains critical aimed at engaging and involving everyone without discrimi- nation. The signiﬁcance of an inclusive, dynamic, multi- stakeholder in the context of COVID-19 and other public health emergencies. A commit- ment to an inclusive health response implies that response activities will be compassionate and sensitive to all. The af- termath of a noninclusive public health response is expensive. For instance, if marginalized or vulnerable groups with poor access to healthcare services experience COVID-19–related symptoms, they may delay or even forgo being tested and may consequently turn to medical care only in late stages, resulting in worse outcomes. This may put their families at risk, facilitating community spread of the virus. Furthermore, Afri- can governments need to start devising means and strategies to ensure inclusive access to COVID-19 vaccine when it becomes available.18 Africa’s COVID-19 and other health emergencies response strategies must be inclusive of marginalized and vulnerable groups to ensure they maintain respect for dignity, human rights, and fundamental freedoms and avoid widening already existing health and social disparities. This reinforces the need to ensure full participation of the communities affected and relevant civil society organizations in preparedness and re- sponse planning, including maintaining the commitment to universal health coverage and ensuring that the most disad- vantaged groups are not forgotten amid the urgent need to respond to any public health emergencies. Strengthening the healthcare systems of African countries through increased political will, increased funding to health care, collaboration and cooperation among stakeholders, and effective leader- in ensuring inclusive responses to ship remains essential health emergencies. Received November 18, 2020. Accepted for publication December 4, 2020. Published online December 15, 2020. Acknowledgments: We appreciate the reviewers for their insightful comments. The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene has waived the Open Access fee for this article due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and has assisted with publication expenses. Disclosure: The authors have completed the ICMJE Uniﬁed Com- peting Interest form available on request from the corresponding author. Authors’ addresses: Yusuff Adebayo Adebisi, Faculty of Pharmacy, Uni- versity of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria, E-mail: . Aniekan Ekpenyong, Global Health Policy Unit, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, E-mail: . Blaise Ntacyabukura, Global Public Health Department, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden, E-mail: . Mat Lowe, Society for the Study of Women’s Health SSWH, Old Yundum, Gambia, E-mail: sswhgambia@ gmail.com. Naﬁsat Dasola Jimoh, Federal University of Technology Minna, Minna, Nigeria, E-mail: . Toyyib Oladi- meji Abdulkareem, Institute of Health, Faculty of Education, Health and Wellbeing, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, United King- dom, E-mail: . Don Eliseo Lucero-Prisno III, Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hy- giene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom, E-mail: don- . This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution CC-BY License, which permits un- restricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. 1. Lucero-Prisno DE, Adebisi YA, Lin X, 2020. Current efforts and challenges facing responses to 2019-nCoV in Africa. Glob Health Res Policy 5: 21. 2. Nkengasong JN, Tessema SK, 2020. Africa needs a new public health order to tackle infectious disease threats. Cell 183: 296–300. 3. Ogunkola IO, Adebisi YA, Imo UF, Odey GO, Esu E, Lucero-Prisno DE, 3rd, 2020. Rural communities in Africa should not be for- gotten in responses to COVID-19. Int J Health Plann Manage 35: 1302–1305. 4. Lucero-Prisno DE, 3rd, Essar MY, Ahmadi A, Lin X, Adebisi YA, 2020. Conﬂict and COVID-19: a double burden for Afghani- stan’s healthcare system. Conﬂ Health 14: 65. 5. David KB, Adebisi YA, 2020. Proposed model for hospital and community pharmacy services during COVID-19 pandemic in Nigeria. Int J Pharm Pract 28: 544–545. 6. Africa Centers for Diseases Control, 2020. Coronavirus Disease 2019 COVID-19. Available at: Accessed November 16, 2020. 7. Adebisi YA, Alaran AJ, Akinokun RT, Micheal AI, Ilesanmi EB, Lucero-Prisno DE, 2020. Sex workers should not Be forgotten in Africa’s COVID-19 response. Am J Trop Med Hyg 103: 1780–1782. 8. Adebisi YA, Lucero Prisno DE, III, 2020. Towards an inclusive health Agenda: people who inject drugs and the COVID-19 response in Africa. Public Health, doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2020.10.017. 9. Maclachlan M, Khasnabis C, Mannan H, 2012. Inclusive health. Trop Med Int Health 17: 139–141. 10. Africa renewal, 2020. COVID-19: People with Disabilities Facing Tougher Times. Available at: magazine/coronavirus/april-2020-special-edition-covid-19/ covid-19-people-disabilities-facing-tough-times. Accessed November 16, 2020. 11. Yap J, Chaudhry V, Jha CK, Mani S, Mitra S, 2020. Are responses to the pandemic inclusive? A rapid virtual audit of COVID-19 press brieﬁngs in LMICs. World Dev 136: 105122. 12. Gachohi J, Karanja S, Mwangi C, 2020. Challenges facing harm reduction interventions in the era of COVID-19 in Africa. Sci- entiﬁc Afr 9: e00506. 13. Muntingh LM, 2020. Africa, prisons and COVID-19. J Hum Rights Pract, doi: 10.1093/jhuman/huaa031. 14. Pallangyo E, Nakate MG, Maina R, Fleming V, 2020. The impact of covid-19 on midwives’ practice in Kenya, Uganda and Tanza- nia: a reﬂective account. Midwifer 89: 102775. 15. Omorogiuwa TBE, 2020. COVID-19 and older adults in Africa: social workers’ utilization of mass media in enforcing policy change. Int Soc Work. 16. Okereke M, Ukor NA, Adebisi YA, Ogunkola IS, Iyagbaye EF, Owhor GA, Lucero-Prisno DE, III, 2020. Impact of COVID-19 on access to healthcare in low- and middle-income countries: current evidence and future recommendations. Int J Health Plann Manage. 17. Relief Web, 2020. Ethiopia: COVID-19 Humanitarian Impact - Situation Update No. 02, As of 13 April 2020. Available at: https:// reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/ethiopia-covid-19-humanitarian- impact-situation-update-no-02-13-april-2020. Accessed No- vember 16, 2020. 18. Adebisi YA, Alaran AJ, Bolarinwa OA, Akande-Sholabi W, Lucero- Prisno DE, 2020. When it is available, will we take it? public perception of hypothetical COVID-19 vaccine in Nigeria. medRxiv. Available at: 10.1101/2020.09.24.20200436v2 Accessed December 10, 2020.