Editorial Board Clinics in Colon and Rectal Surgery Editor in Chief Scott R. Steele, USA Dr. Steele is a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, NY, and left the military in and was awarded the Bronze Star and Combat Medical Badge, amongst numerous other commendations. He served as the Division Chief of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Vice Chairman of Clinical Affairs, and Associate Director of Surgical Services for the Digestive Health Institute at University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, in Cleveland OH from 2015-2016. He was named the Chairman of the Department of Colorectal Surgery at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland, OH, a position which he has held since November of 2016. He is an active participant in 11 surgical societies and several national committees for both the Society of University Surgeons and American Society of Colon & Rectal Surgeons including chairing the Clinical Practice Guidelines committee, for which he has written several national Practice Parameter guidelines. He currently serves on several editorial boards including the Cochrane Colorectal Cancer Group, Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Journal of Surgical Oncology, Annals of Surgery, and was recently selected as a Co- editor for Diseases of the Colon & Rectum. In addition, he serves as the Editor-in-Chief for Clinics in Colon and Rectal Surgery and the Colorectal Surgery Community Web Editor for the American College of Surgeons. Scott is also a member of the American Board of Colon & Rectal Surgery. His contributions to the medical literature include over 250 peer-reviewed articles, invited reviews, book chapters, and national practice parameters. He has served as a guest editor for seven volumes dedicated to colorectal disease and is the co-editor of seven Colorectal Surgery textbooks including the 3rd edition of the ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery. He has been married to his wife, Michele, since 2001 and they are the proud parents of one daughter, Marianna. Editorial Board Anuradha R. Bhama, USA Dr. Anuradha Bhama is a staff Colon and Rectal Surgeon at Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland Ohio. Prior to this she was the Director of Robotic Colorectal Surgery, and Assistant Professor of Surgery at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, IL. She was also the Director of the Rush Program for Complex Reoperative Colorectal Surgery. She attended University of Michigan for her undergraduate degree and The Ohio State University for her medical degree. She completed training in General Surgery at University of Iowa and completed a research fellowship in surgical oncology at University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. She completed her Colon and Rectal Surgery training at St. Joseph Mercy-Ann Arbor/ University of Michigan with additional training in complex minimally invasive and re-operative colorectal surgery at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland, Ohio. She is Board-Certified in General Surgery and Colon and Rectal Surgery. She serves on the Young Surgeons and Clinical Practice Guidelines Committees for the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgery and has served as the chair of the Young Surgeons Committee Mock Oral Exam. Additionally, she served on the Disease of the Colon & Rectum Selected Abstracts and Reviewer’s Guild and currently serves on the Editorial Board. Dr. Bhama’s practice spans the range of colon and rectal disease. She specializes in complex reoperative colorectal surgery and advanced robotic techniques. Her interests are enterocutaneous fistulas, chronic anastomotic complications, and complex reoperative pelvic operations including those for IBD and recurrent colorectal cancer. Her focus is on advanced minimally invasive techniques including the utilization of robotic surgery for reoperative surgery. Joshua I. S. Bleier, USA Joshua Bleier is an Associate Professor of Surgery at the University of Pennsylvania / Perelman School of Medicine. He is the Section Chief of Colorectal Surgery at Pennsylvania Hospital. He is the Program Director of the Colorectal Fellowship. He is the Chairman of the ASCRCS CREST Committee. He attended The University of Pennsylvania for both his undergraduate and medical degrees. He received his General Surgery training at Cornell and completed a research fellowship in Immunology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. He completed his Colon and Rectal Training at the University of Minnesota. He is Board-Certified in General and Colon and Rectal Surgery. Dr. Bleier’s practice spans the range of colon and rectal disease. He specializes in the management and treatment of benign diverticular disease and Colon and rectal Cancer with both standard and minimally invasive approaches, with an emphasis on sphincter-preservation. His areas of specialty also include the surgical treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, as well as the spectrum of benign anorectal and pelvic floor disorders, including sacral nerve stimulation for fecal incontinence. His practice includes colonoscopy, as well as advanced techniques for local treatment of early rectal polyps and cancers with Transanal Endoscopic Microsurgery TEM. Bradley Champagne, USA Bradley Champagne, MD is a Professor of Surgery in the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, the Chair of Surgery at Cleveland Clinic Fairview Hospital, Surgical Director for the Digestive Disease & Surgery Institute Western Region, and a colorectal surgeon in the Department of Colorectal Surgery. Dr. Champagne serves on several Editorial Boards and has prominent leadership roles in the American College of Surgeons and the American Society of Colorectal Surgery. His clinical interests include minimally invasive surgery for colorectal cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, diverticulitis and ano-rectal disease. Jennifer Davids, USA Dr. Jennifer Davids is an Associate Professor of Surgery at the University of Massachusetts in Worcester, MA, where she has been on faculty in colon and rectal surgery since 2013. A Massachusetts native, she completed her residency training at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and was the inaugural fellow in colon and rectal surgery at UMASS. Her clinical interests are diverse and include inflammatory bowel disease, surgery for pelvic organ prolapse, advanced endoscopy, and colorectal cancer, with an emphasis on minimally invasive approaches including laparoscopy and robotics. Her research highlights include the study of gender equity in surgery, use of internet and social media by physicians and patients, as well as clinical outcomes research in colon and rectal surgery. She also serves on the editorial board of Diseases of the Colon and Rectum and is an active member of multiple Association of Colon and Rectal Surgery committees and is on the council for the Association of Women Surgeons. Rebecca E. Hoedema, USA Rebecca E. Hoedema is the current Colorectal Surgery Fellowship Program Director at Spectrum Health/Michigan State University, formerly The Ferguson Clinic. She is also an Associate Professor of Surgery at Michigan State University College of Human Medicine. She attended Indiana University for her undergraduate education with completion of both a master’s degree and her medical degree at Indiana University School of Medicine. She then received her General Surgery training at Butterworth Hospital, now known as Spectrum Health/Michigan State University with a fellowship at The Ferguson Clinic, now known as Spectrum Health/Michigan State University. She stayed in the Grand Rapids, Michigan area and became the first female faculty within the Spectrum Health colorectal surgery group and became partners with many of her mentors. She is board certified in both general surgery and colorectal surgery. She has a very busy, broad clinical practice with an emphasis on the importance of graduate medical education as the Fellowship Program Director. She is also a member of the Residency Review Committee through the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education for colorectal surgery. She is actively involved in many local and national societies and has active involvement in the annual American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons meeting. She is currently a member of the American Board of Colon and Rectal surgery. Amy L. Lightner, USA Amy Lightner is an Associate Professor of Surgery in the Department of Colon and Rectal Surgery at Cleveland Clinic, OH, the Associate Chair of Surgical Research, and is an Associate Professor of Inflammation and Immunity with a focus on regenerative therapy for Crohn’s disease. Dr. Lightner received her B.A. in Human Biology from Stanford University, completed her surgical training in General Surgery at University of California at Los Angeles and post-doctoral work at Stanford University under a California Institute of Regenerative Medicine Training Grant focused on the differentiation pathways of embryonic stem cells. After completing her fellowship at Mayo Clinic, she stayed on as surgical faculty, and was the Medical Director for the Center for Regenerative Medicine at Mayo Clinic. She was then recruited to Cleveland Clinic to focus on complex inflammatory bowel disease and continue her work in clinical trials and in the basic science laboratory. She has received extramural funding from the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation, Cure for IBD, Rainin Foundation and American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgery. She is a member of the editorial board of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Colorectal Disease, British Journal of Surgery, Crohn’s and Colitis 360, and Diseases of the Colon and Rectum, the surgical co-chair for the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation annual meeting and is the associate chair of the inflammatory bowel disease committee, clinical practice guidelines committee, surgical research committee within the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Rodrigo Oliva Perez, Brazil Graduation – University of São Paulo School of Medicine 1998 PhD – University of São Paulo School of Medicine 2006 Post-doctorate – University of São Paulo School of Medicine 2010 Current Positions: Staff Colorectal Surgeon University of São Paulo School of Medicine Colorectal Surgery Division Staff Colorectal Surgeon Angelita & Joaquim Gama Institute Colorectal Surgery Division Clinical Research Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research São Paulo Branch – Brazil Editorial Board Positions Associate Editor Diseases of Colon & Rectum Colorectal Diseases Techniques in Coloproctology Annals of Surgical Oncology Emeritus Editor-in-Chief David E. Beck, MD Dr. Beck was a Distinguished Graduate of the USAF Academy and attended medical school at the University of Miami. He completed his residency in general surgery at Wilford Hall USAF Medical School, Lackland AFB, Texas and completed a fellowship in colorectal surgery at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio. He is board certified in general and colon and rectal surgery and is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons and the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. After retiring from the Air Force, where he was Chairman and Residency Program Director of the Department of General Surgery at Wilford Hall USAF Medical Center and the Military Consultant to the Air Force Surgeon General in Colon and Rectal Surgery, Dr. Beck joined Ochsner in 1993, served as Chairman of the Colon and Rectal Surgery Department from 1995 to 2014, and is now Chairman Emeritus. Dr. Beck conducts research into colorectal diseases, has authored and edited eight medical textbooks, and written over 250 scientific publications. He was the President of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons ASCRS from 2010-2011 and is a member of many other medical associations. He served as a member of the Board of Governors of the Ochsner Clinic Foundation from 2005 to 2012. Dr. Beck is on the editorial board of several prestigious medical journals. In addition to his clinical and administrative duties, he is a Professor of Surgery at the University of Queensland, Australia and is on the clinical faculty at the Louisiana State University and Uniformed Services University Schools of Medicine. Dr. Beck is listed in Who’s Who, Best Doctors in America, Good Housekeeping’s Top Cancer Doctors for Women, and Best Surgeons in New Orleans. Dr. Beck is a nationally recognized expert in inflammatory bowel disease, anal, rectal and colon cancer, stomas, adhesions, bowel preparation, sphincter saving surgery for cancer, laparoscopic surgery, and postoperative pain management. Social Media Editor Kyle Cologne, USA Kyle G. Cologne, USA is an Assistant Professor of Surgery at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine in Los Angeles. He grew up in Los Angeles and did his general surgery training in Chicago at Rush University and Cook County Medical Centers before returning to Southern California. He has an interest and expertise in social media and has been the chair of the social media committee for the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. His research interests also include minimally invasive surgery, quality improvement, and inflammatory bowel disease.