JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – LICENSE TO PUBLISH This LICENSE TO PUBLISH this “License”, dated as of: this License; and that the person executing this License on the the “Effective Date”, is executed by the corresponding author listed on Schedule A the “Author” to grant a license to the Medical Research Division of Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc., a Delaware corporation, having its principal place of business at Two Commerce Square, 2001 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103 Author’s behalf is authorized to do so; iii the Work and the licenses granted herein do not and will not infringe upon, violate or misappropriate any intellectual property rights or any other proprietary right, contract or other right or interest of any third party; iv if the Work is a multi-authored Work, the Author has obtained written permission from each author of the Work to enter into this License on behalf of such author, and each such author has read, understands and has agreed to the terms of this License; the “Publisher”, and together with the Author, each, a “Party”, and v the Author has obtained any necessary releases and together, the “Parties”. 1. Grant of License permissions to quote from other sources in the Work and to include any works and materials in the Work, including all releases from patients whose names or likenesses are submitted as part of The Author hereby grants to the Publisher and its affiliates the the Work; all such releases and permissions are in full force and exclusive, worldwide, royalty free, perpetual for the duration of effect, and the Author will promptly provide any such release or the applicable copyright right and license to use the Work as permission to the Publisher upon request by the Publisher; defined on Schedule A for all commercial or educational vi neither the Work nor any content contained in the Work, in purposes, including, but not limited to, publishing, reproducing, whole or in part, has been published or is being considered for marketing, distributing themselves and through distributors, publication other than in the Journal as defined in Section 3.a.; sublicensing, and selling copies of the Work throughout the world for the Term. If the Author is a United States government employee, such license grant shall be limited to the extent the Author is able to grant such license. 2. Warranties, Indemnification, and Limitation of Liability a. The Author represents and warrants to the Publisher that: vii the Author has disclosed to the Publisher, prior to or simultaneously with submission of the Work, all intellectual contributions, technical help, financial or material support, and all financial or other relationships that may constitute or lead to a conflict of interest; vii the Work is not subject to any rights of copyright other than the copyright of the Author and each other author of the Work; ix the Work does not and will not violate the publicity or privacy i the Author has the right and power to enter into this License, rights of any third party, or libel or slander any third party; to grant the rights and licenses granted pursuant to this License, and to perform all of the Author’s other obligations contained in this License; x the Work does not and will not contain any scandalous, obscene, or negligently prepared information; xi the Work is not and will not be fraudulent, plagiarized, or ii the Author has not previously assigned, transferred or otherwise encumbered the rights or licenses granted pursuant to incorrectly attributed; JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish xii no aspect of the Author’s personal or professional to users under the terms of the Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 circumstances currently, or in the past 12 months, causes the Creative Commons License, as currently displayed at Author to have a conflict of interest with respect to the Work; the “CC xiii neither the Author, nor any member of the Author’s immediate family, nor any individual or entity with whom or which the Author has or has had a significant working relationship has received anything of value from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of the Work; and xiv the Author has read and understands the statements on Schedule B and has completed Schedule B in its entirety. b. The Author hereby indemnifies the Publisher and its directors, officers, employees, agents, and representatives and agrees to defend and hold them harmless from and against any and all liability, damage, loss, costs or expenses including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of settlement incurred by any such party arising out of, or relating to any misrepresentation in, or breach or BY-NC”. The Author acknowledges and agrees that that Publisher is the exclusive “Licensor”, as defined in the CC BY-NC, of the Work and that the Publisher may make the Work freely available to all users under the terms of the CC BY-NC. c. CCBY-ND – Non Derivatives Creative Commons License The Author acknowledges and agrees that the Work will be published by the Publisher in the Journal and made freely available to users under the terms of the Attribution- NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License, as currently displayed at nd/4.0/legalcode the “CC BY-ND”. The Author acknowledges and agrees that the Publisher is the exclusive “Licensor”, as defined in the CC BY-ND, of the Work and that the Publisher may make the Work freely available to all users under the terms of the alleged breach of the Author’s representations or warranties in this License. If the Author fails to promptly or diligently pursue CC BY-ND. any defense of any indemnified party, the indemnified parties, or any of them, may assume such defense at the Author’s expense. The obligations of this indemnification will survive any termination or expiration of this License. 3. Creative Commons License Creative Commons Licenses are subject to items selected in item 1 and 2 in the Schedule B. a. CCBY-NC-ND – NonCommercial-NonDerivitives Creative Commons License d. CCBY – Creative Commons License The Author acknowledges and agrees that the Work will be published by the Publisher in the Journal and made freely available to users under the terms of the Attribution 4.0 Creative Commons License, as currently displayed at the “CC BY”. The Author acknowledges and agrees that that Publisher is the exclusive “Licensor”, as defined in the CC BY, of the Work and that the Publisher may make the Work freely available to all users under the terms of the CC BY. The Author acknowledges and agrees that the Work will be published by the Publisher in the Journal of the American Academy 4. Royalties of Orthopaedic Surgeons Global Research & Reviews the “Journal” and made freely available to users under the terms of the Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 Creative Commons License, as currently displayed at the “CC BY-NC-ND”. The Author acknowledges and agrees that that Publisher is the exclusive “Licensor”, as defined in the CC BY-NC- ND, of the Work and that the Publisher may make the Work freely available to all users under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND. b. CCBY-NC – NonCommercial Creative Commons License The Author acknowledges and agrees that the Work will be published by the Publisher in the Journal and made freely available The Author acknowledges and agrees that this License entitles the Author to no royalties or fees. To the maximum extent permitted by law, the Author waives any and all rights the Author may have to collect royalties or other fees in relation to the Work or in respect of any use of the Work by the Publisher or its sublicensees. 5. Miscellaneous a. Assignment. This License may not be assigned or transferred, in whole or in part, by the Author. The Publisher may freely assign this License. This License will be binding upon and inure to the JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish benefit of the Parties hereto and their respective successors and shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal, invalid, or permitted assigns. unenforceable provision had never comprised a part of this b. Execution. Facsimile or Portable Document Format PDF signatures will be deemed original signatures for purposes of this License. c. Entire Agreement; Amendment. This License sets forth the entire agreement of the Parties on the subject hereof and supersedes all previous or contemporaneous oral or written representations or agreements relating to the rights and duties provided herein, and may not be modified or amended except by written agreement of the Publisher. d. Governing Law. This License shall be governed in all respects according to the laws of the State of Illinois without giving effect to the principles of conflict of law thereof. e. Headings. All headings are for reference purposes only and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any provision hereof. g. Severability. If any provision of this License is held to be illegal, invalid, or unenforceable under the present or future laws, then such provision shall be revised by a court of competent jurisdiction to be enforceable if permitted under applicable law, and otherwise shall be fully severable. In any event, this License License, and the remaining provisions of this License shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by the illegal, invalid, or unenforceable provision or by its severance from this License. h. Status of the Parties. The Parties are independent contractors. Nothing in this License is intended to or shall be construed to constitute or establish any agency, joint venture, partnership or fiduciary relationship between the Parties, and neither Party has the right or authority to bind the other Party nor shall either Party be responsible for the acts or omissions of the other Party. i. Waiver; Amendment. The waiver by the Publisher of or the failure by the Publisher to claim a breach of any provision of this License shall not be, or be held to be, a waiver of any subsequent breach or affect in any way the further effectiveness of any such provision. No term or condition of this License may be waived except by an agreement by the Publisher in writing. j. Waiver of Jury Trial. THE AUTHOR WAIVES THE AUTHOR’S SUBJECT MATTER HEREOF. JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish The Author must complete this Schedule A in its entirety. The Publisher is unable to publish the Work unless this Schedule A is completely filled out. Article Title the “Work” Corresponding Author Name the “Author” Copyright Owner’s Name Manuscript Number Optional JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish The Author must complete this Schedule B in its entirety. The Society is unable to publish the Work unless this Schedule B is completely filled out. If the Work or a portion of it has been created in the course of any author's employment by the United States Government, please skip to Schedule C and do not select a Creative Commons license. 1. Please disclose below if you or any other author of the Work has received funding for research on which the Work is based from any of the following organizations: Research Councils UK RCUK Austrian Science Fund FWF World Bank Wellcome Trust/COAF World Health Organization WHO Grantee World Health Organization WHO Employee Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 2. If you have selected funding from the above list in Section B.1, please select Attribution CC BY here: Attribution CC BY. Creative Commons describes this license as follows: “This license lets others distribute, remix, tweak, and build upon your work, even commercially, as long as they credit you for the original creation. This is the most accommodating of licenses offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination and use of licensed materials.” If no selection has been made under “Public Access Policy Funding Disclosure” above, please select the Creative Commons License pursuant to which the Publisher will license the Work a description of each license, and the license terms, can be reviewed at JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish Select one from the list below: Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs CC BY-NC-ND. Creative Commons describes this license as follows: “This license is the most restrictive of our six main licenses, only allowing others to download your works and share them with others as long as they credit you, but they can’t change them in any way or use them commercially.” Attribution-NonCommercial CC BY-NC. Creative Commons describes this license as follows: “This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon your work non-commercially, and although their new works must also acknowledge you and be non-commercial, they don’t have to license their derivative works on the same terms.” Attribution-NoDerivs CC BY-ND. Creative Commons describes this license as follows: “This license allows for redistribution, commercial and non-commercial, as long as it is passed along unchanged and in whole, with credit to you.” JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish If the Work or a portion of it has been created in the course of any author's employment by the United States Government, check the "Government" box at the end of this form. A work prepared by a government employee as part of his or her official duties is called a "work of the U.S. Government" and is not subject to copyright. If it is not prepared as part of the employee's official duties, it may be subject to copyright. If “Government” is chosen, please skip to Schedule C and do not choose a Copyright Clearance License. The work will be published with “Written work prepared by employees of the Federal Government as part of their official duties is, under the U.S. Copyright Act, a “work of the United States Government” for which copyright protection under Title 17 of the United States Code is not available. As such, copyright does not extend to the contributions of employees of the Federal Government.” JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish The Corresponding Author acknowledges and agrees that the Corresponding Author is entering into, and has executed, the Agreement on behalf of the Corresponding Author and each other author named as contributing to the Article each such author, an “Author”, and collectively, the “Authors”. The Corresponding Author represents and warrants that the Corresponding Author has obtained permission from each Author to enter into the Agreement on behalf of such Author and the Corresponding Author and each Author has read, understands, and has agreed to the terms of the Agreement, including, without limitation, the terms contained in the Agreement with respect to authorized reuse of the Article. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Corresponding Author has executed this License, on behalf of all Co-Authors, effective as of the Effective Date. Important Note: Once you electronically sign this form, you will not be able to make any additional changes to it. To electronically sign this form, click the signature field above and provide the information requested in the dialog boxes. JAAOS Global Research & Reviews – License to Publish